3D human tongue reconstruction from single “in-the-wild” images
Stylianos Ploumpis1,2 *
1

Stylianos Moschoglou1,2 *
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2
2

Imperial College London, UK

Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

1 {s.ploumpis,s.moschoglou,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

arXiv:2106.12302v1 [cs.CV] 23 Jun 2021

Vasileios Triantafyllou2

2 {vasilios.triantafyllou}@huawei.com

Figure 1. We propose a framework that accurately derives the 3D tongue shape from single images. A high detailed 3D point cloud of the
tongue surface and a full head topology along with the tongue expression can be estimated from the image domain. As we demonstrate,
our framework is able to capture the tongue shape even in adverse “in-the-wild” conditions.

Abstract

dataset, consisting of 1, 800 raw scans of 700 individuals
varying in gender, age, and ethnicity backgrounds * . As we
demonstrate in an extensive series of quantitative as well
as qualitative experiments, our model proves to be robust
and realistically captures the 3D tongue structure, even in
adverse “in-the-wild” conditions.

3D face reconstruction from a single image is a task
that has garnered increased interest in the Computer Vision
community, especially due to its broad use in a number of
applications such as realistic 3D avatar creation, pose invariant face recognition and face hallucination. Since the
introduction of the 3D Morphable Model in the late 90’s,
we witnessed an explosion of research aiming at particularly tackling this task. Nevertheless, despite the increasing
level of detail in the 3D face reconstructions from single
images mainly attributed to deep learning advances, finer
and highly deformable components of the face such as the
tongue are still absent from all 3D face models in the literature, although being very important for the realness of the
3D avatar representations. In this work we present the first,
to the best of our knowledge, end-to-end trainable pipeline
that accurately reconstructs the 3D face together with the
tongue. Moreover, we make this pipeline robust in “in-thewild” images by introducing a novel GAN method tailored
for 3D tongue surface generation. Finally, we make publicly available to the community the first diverse tongue

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D face reconstruction from single “in-thewild” images has been a very active topic in Computer Vision with applications ranging from realistic 3D avatar creation to image imputation and face recognition [48, 17, 43,
25, 41, 15]. Nevertheless, despite the improvement in the
quality of the 3D reconstructions, all of these methods do
not accommodate any statistical variations in the oral cavity let alone a tongue template mesh. As a result, the oral
region is completely disregarded from the final result.
Being able to reconstruct the tongue expression has multiple advantages in various applications. First of all, the
generated avatars would be more realistic and would be able
* Project url:
https://github.com/steliosploumpis/
3D_human_tongue_reconstruction

* Authors contributed equally.

1

to mimic many more facial expressions. Moreover, speech
animation tasks would be improved as the inclusion of the
oral cavity plays a significant role. Finally, face recognition
applications could be enhanced as more extreme poses and
expressions would be modeled.
However, as we already pointed out, all of the current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods [48, 17, 43] do not contain the tongue component in their implementations. This
is because of two reasons: a) there is no publicly available
tongue dataset, and b) it is very challenging to carry out
3D reconstruction of the face together with the tongue in
“in-the-wild” conditions, because of the highly deformable
nature of the human tongue.
To tackle the absence of tongue data, we collected a
large and diverse dataset of textured 3D tongue point-clouds
(more info about the data in Section 3). Having captured
the data, we created a pipeline which is comprised of the
following parts: a) a tongue point-cloud autoencoder (AE)
which is used to derive useful 3D features of our raw collected 3D data, b) a tongue image encoder optimized based
on the aforementioned 3D features, c) a shape decoder
which translates the encoder outputs to the parameter space
of the Universal Head Model (UHM) [37]. We should note
that the UHM in our case is further rigged/modified so that it
can model various tongue shapes/expressions, as explained
in Section 3. We begin by training the AE in step a) and then
we train steps b-d) in an end-to-end fashion so that the output tongue expression of the UHM model is as close as possible to the corresponding ground-truth 3D tongue pointcloud of the 2D tongue image.
Since there is a lack of ground-truth 3D tongue data corresponding to “in-the-wild” 2D tongue images, the pipeline
we described so far is only trained using our collected data
which were captured under controlled conditions. This results in sub-optimal performance in “in-the-wild” conditions. To remedy this, we developed a novel conditional
GAN framework that is able to generate accurate 3D tongue
point-clouds based on the image encoder outputs (step b) of
the pipeline). Having created new image/point-cloud pairs
of “in-the-wild” tongue data, we re-train the pipeline using
also these new data. As we show in Section 4, this addition
substantially improves the quality of the tongue reconstructions.
To summarize, the contributions of our work are the following:
• We release a dataset of 1, 800 raw tongue scans of various shapes and positions, corresponding to around 700
subjects. Being the first such diverse tongue dataset, it
can be proven very useful to the community.
• We present a complete pipeline trained in an end-toend fashion that is able to reconstruct the 3D face together with the tongue from a single image.

• To make this pipeline robust to “in-the-wild” images,
we introduce a novel GAN framework which is able to
accurately reconstruct 3D tongues from “in-the-wild”
images with an increasing level of detail.

2. Related Work
Single view 3D reconstruction of human facial/head
parts is undeniably an extremely valuable task in Computer
Vision. However, it has posed many challenges to the research community, due to the fundamental depth ambiguities and the ill-posed nature of the problem. In order to constrain the ambiguity of the problem, many statistical parametric models have been introduced for different parts of
the human face/head [3, 6, 29, 38].
Due to the increasing interest of facial analysis over the
years the research community has mainly focused on human facial reconstructions. Since the inception of facial 3D
Morphable Models (3DMMs) in [3], a myriad of scientific
papers have been published focusing solely on the reconstruction of facial shape and appearance [4, 5, 17, 25]. Only
recently with the emergence of 3D scanning data has the
research interest shifted to other significant parts of the human head. A few head models have been introduced during the recent years but without any statistical craniofacial
correlations [29, 40]. The first craniofacial 3DMM of the
human head was introduced in [13] and later extended and
leveraged into a 3D head reconstruction setting from unconstrained single images [38]. A few recent works tried
to align a skull structure of the the human head with the
facial topology [30, 31] in order to obtain a distribution of
plausible face shapes given a skull shape.
Finer details of the human face/head started to appear
with the introduction of 3D human ear modeling [50]. Ears
are key structures of the human head that have an important contribution to the biometric recognition and general
appearance of a person. The two foremost examples of ear
models were introduced in [51, 12] but none of them was
fused to a face/head in order to create a complete appearance.
Moreover, in an attempt to overcome the “uncanny valley” problem, a few approaches have tried to model the independent variations/movements of the human eye and the
the facial eye region [46, 2]. These efforts are challenging
due to the limited amount of data around the eye region and
the extreme level of detail required for this task. Moving
towards the oral cavity, teeth modeling was introduced in
[47, 44], where the 3D structure of the teeth was recovered
from 2D images via an elaborate optimization scheme.
Only very recently, a few approaches [28, 37] have tried
to combine all of these aforementioned attributes of the human head (eyes, ears, teeth, and inner oral cavity) in order to
build a complete model in terms of shape and texture, which

Figure 2. Random 3D tongue expressions of our synthetic database based on the mean UHM template. The expressions are rigged and
manually sculpted to induce more variance around the tongue surface and the general oral cavity.

accurately represents the human head. Although these models include an oral topology, none of them deals with the dynamics of the tongue, something which is really important
for speech animation and the overall realness of the avatar
representation. To this end, in this work we aim at extending these approaches and paving the way towards a realistic
human appearance by releasing a diverse 3D tongue dataset
to the research community. We also present the first framework for accurate 3D human tongue reconstruction from
single images.

3. 3D human tongue reconstruction
In this Section we present the complete tongue reconstruction pipeline. We begin by describing our collected
2D/3D tongue dataset and our manually rigged tongue
dataset which is based on the the UHM [37] template. We
further provide details about the point-cloud AE, the image
encoder, the shape decoder and the overall loss functions we
used to optimize the pipeline for the tongue reconstruction.
Moreover, we present the novel conditional GAN method
which is able to accurately reconstruct 3D tongue pointclouds of “in-the-wild” tongue images. Finally, we explain
how we used the generated point-clouds of the GAN to retrain the pipeline to achieve better results in “in-the-wild”
conditions.

3.1. Tongue datasets
TongueDB: the first 3D tongue dataset. As mentioned
in Section 1, we collected a large dataset comprising of textured 3D tongue scans. Our point cloud database, dubbed
TongueDB, contains approximately 1,800 3D tongue scans
which were captured during a special exhibition in the Science Museum, London. The subjects were instructed to perform a range of tongue expressions (i.e., tongue out left and
right, tongue out center, tongue out center round, tongue
out center extreme open mouth, tongue inside left and right,
etc.). Some example images can be seen in Fig. 6. The capturing apparatus utilized for this task was a 3dMD 4 camera
structured light stereo system, which produces high quality
dense meshes. We recorded a total of 700 distinct subjects
with available metadata about them, including their gender
(42% male, 58% female), age, and ethnicity (82% White,

9% Asian, 3% Black and 6% other).
Rigged tongue database. In order to carry out 3D
tongue and face reconstruction, we would need to use a
face/head model. Nevertheless, one major drawback of all
of the currently used face/head models [29, 40, 13] is that
they are missing the tongue component. This is because it is
a challenging task to non-rigidly capture in a fixed template
the 3D topology of the oral cavity. These challenges include: a) the highly deformable nature of the tongue, b) the
non-convexity of the mouth region, c) the specular texture
of the teeth. In order to alleviate this issue, we constructed
a synthetic 3D head and tongue dataset rigged by 3D artists.
For our neutral mesh template T̄ we utilize the mean template of the UHM [37] as it provides all the necessary components of the human oral cavity in accordance with the
entire head statistical structure. The resulting rigged tongue
expressions rise at 75 distinct meshes. In order to further
augment our synthetic dataset, we performed trilinear interpolation between the closest expression meshes and generated a total of ns = 720 tongue expressions. Some example synthetic expressions are shown in Fig. 2. A standard
PCA was applied on the interpolated meshes resulting in an
orthogonal basis matrix Ut ∈ R3N ×nt (where N are the
mesh vertices and nt = 110 the kept components). The
PCA is performed on the entire set of head vertices and not
solely on the oral cavity. In this way, it is more efficient
afterwards to transfer the tongue expression from the mean
head to a head with a different facial identity.

3.2. Method
Tongue point-cloud AE. In order to accurately reconstruct a tongue in its 3D form based on a 2D image, our
image encoder needs to be guided by meaningful target labels which can capture all the desired 3D point-cloud information. These labels, denoted as y ∈ R256 , are learned
by autoencoding the raw point-clouds of our dataset (i.e.,
the raw 3D tongue scans). For this task, we utilize a self
organizing-map framework for hierarchical feature extraction [27].
Tongue image encoder. The task of the tongue image
encoder is to produce features which are close to the target 3D features y of the AE. To make the encoder robust to
various camera angles or illuminations, we employ a ren-

27/06/2020

27/06/2020

27/06/2020
Ground Truth
Point Cloud

draw.io

draw.io

Tongue Point Cloud
Auto-Encoder

draw.io

y

ℒy = ∥y − ỹ∥2

Rendered input Image

MLP

ỹ

PCA
Shape Decoder

pt

x1
y1
z1

ℒtotal = λ1ℒCD + λ2ℒn + λ3ℒl + λ4ℒe + λ5ℒc + λ6ℒy

Ut

Embedding Net
ResNet-50

yn
xn
zn

Regressed tongue
expression

Figure 3. An illustration of our tongue reconstruction framework. First we train the point-cloud AE on its own to get meaningful 3D
features (y) and then we trained the image encoder /shape decoder using a number of different losses as explained in Section 3

Shape decoder. In order to decode the encoder ỹ labels into meaningful tongue shapes, we use the synthetic
PCA model Ut of the rigged tongue expression dataset. To
this end, after producing the ỹ labels, we utilize a standard
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) which works as a regression
scheme to the latent parameters pt ∈ R110 of the synthetic
PCA tongue model. The statistical nature of the PCA model
helps us constrain the final result during training and ensures meaningful deformations which lie inside the spectrum of our rigged/modified UHM model.
Pipeline training. During training, we first train the
point-cloud AE on its own and then train the pipeline of
the image encoder and shape decoder in an end-to-end fashion. To optimize the pipeline, we apply a total of 6 losses
with each one contributing to the quality of the final result. The first 2 losses are calculated between the predicted
tongue expression of the rigged/modified UHM model and
the ground-truth tongue point-cloud of the corresponding
input image. Similarly to [45], we adopt a Chamfer loss
[16] LCD to optimize the position of the resulting template
points as well as a normal loss Ln to correct the orientation
of the mesh. In order to compute an accurate Chamfer loss,

we only utilize a small area around the oral cavity which
is defined based on the ground-truth point-cloud. Additionally, we calculate a Laplacian regularization Ll loss between our predicted mesh the mean shape of the PCA model
in order to prevent the vertices from moving too freely outside the mean positions and constrain the resulting shape
to be smooth. An edge length loss Le is also introduced
which penalizes any flying vertices (outliers). Finally, we
employ a collision loss Lc which prevents the points of the
tongue to penetrate the surface of the oral cavity and is formulated as the sum of each collision error around the 12
mouth landmarks of the UHM template (as illustrated in the
supplementary material):

27/06/2020

dering framework where we utilize the textured raw scans
(TongueDB in Section 3.1). We render our 1,8K textured
meshes with a pre-computed radiance transfer technique using spherical harmonics which efficiently represent global
light scattering. Additionally, we use more than 15 different indoor scenes coupled with random light positions and
mesh orientations around all 3D axes, resulting in approximately 100K images. As an encoder we used a ResNet-50
[20] model pre-trained on ImageNet [14] and fine-tuned it
on our dataset. In particular, we modified the last layer of
the network to output a vector ỹ ∈ R256 similar to the dimension of the ground truth vector y.

11 N −1

Lcol =


1 XX
max 0, dik
N
i=0

(1)

k=0

dik = r2 − q1i − xk

2

− q2i − yk

2

− q3i − zk

2

The Lcol is calculated as the sum of distances of each
collided point qi = {q1i , q2i , q3i } to the sphere k with center
the landmark coordinates xk , yk , zk and radius r = 1, 5cm.
Lastly, we impose a final L2 loss Ly in the intermediate
step of our pipeline where we constrain the predicted ỹ encoded features to be as close as possible to the ground-truth
features y of the corresponding autoencoded point-cloud.
This loss is of paramount importance because: a) the ỹ features in this way contain rich 3D information invariant to
texture/illumination variations and b) our “in-the-wild” extension which we introduce later is based on a generative
point-cloud framework that relies on such rich 3D features.
The final loss function Ltotal is given by:
Ltotal = λ1 LCD + λ2 Ln + λ3 Ll + λ4 Le + λ5 Lc + λ6 Ly
(2)

TongueGAN architecture

Generator (G)
Label MLP

Injection MLP Layers (I)

y

Noise MLP

z∼

z

I2

I1

c

o

L1G

y

Output layer

o

L2G

…

Discriminator (D)
Label MLP

L9G

x
y
z

Main MLP layers (LD)

Generated
Surface Point

G(z, y) = x̃t

Main MLP layers (LG)

(0,I)

Point MLP

x̃t

or

xt

c

L1D

L2D

…

L8D

Real/Fake

x
y
z

𝒩

Figure 4. Symbol c stands for row-wise concatenation along the channel dimension. Symbol o stands for element-wise (i.e., Hadamard)
product. The Generator inputs are a Gaussian noise sample z and a label y corresponding to a particular tongue, from which we want to
sample a 3D point. The Discriminator input pairs are a label y which corresponds to a specific tongue and xt a real 3D point belonging to
the aforementioned tongue point-cloud (but sampled as explained in Section 3.3.1) and G (z, y) = x̃t a generated point belonging to this
tongue. The Discriminator is asked to distinguish the real from the fake point.

where λ1 , . . . , λ6 are training hyper-parameters. During
inference, the encoder network takes as an input a single
tongue image and predicts a 3D embedding ỹ, which is
later transformed to the corresponding pt parameters of the
synthetic expression model, through the MLP between the
two latent spaces. Finally, we apply the PCA model of the
rigged head model on these pt parameters to derive the final
mesh of the head with the tongue expression. An overview
of the methodology can be seen in Fig. 3.

3.3. TongueGAN for “in-the-wild” reconstruction
Although the pipeline presented in Section 3.2 provides a
good estimation of the tongue pose in the test set of our collected data, it does not perform very well in “in-the-wild”
images (Fig. 9). This behavior is expected because our
collected data were captured in controlled conditions and
the training of the encoder was carried out only with rendered images which do not fully mimic “in-the-wild” conditions. To make our approach robust in “in-the-wild” images
too, we would need to further train the pipeline by using
also such data. However, for “in-the-wild” collected images from the web, we do not have their corresponding 3D
tongue point-clouds. As a result, to use “in-the-wild” data
in the pipeline, we would first need to have a method that
can learn the distribution of our collected 3D tongue data
and generalize well.
Finding a method to generate novel 3D tongues is tricky.
This is because of several unique properties of the human
tongue: a) it is a highly deformable object, so we cannot
register our collected data in a reference template and apply
relevant methods [7, 35, 39], b) it is a non-watertight surface
(i.e., it contains holes) so we cannot also use any implicit
function approximations methods [36, 42, 33] or volumetric
approaches [22, 23, 49]. Therefore, having excluded the
aforementioned categories, we decided to use GANs [18]

for the 3D tongue surface generations.
In order to generate accurate point-clouds that correspond to certain tongue images, our GAN, dubbed as
TongueGAN, needs to be guided by meaningful labels
which can capture all the desired 3D surface information.
These labels are provided by the trained point-cloud AE as
described in Section 3. Since the generation is driven by
labels, TongueGAN is a conditional one [34].
In particular, given a label denoted as y and a random
Gaussian noise z ∈ R128 , the generator G produces a novel
point-cloud point G (z, y) ∈ R3 , which we denote as x̃t ,
that belongs to the tongue surface represented by the label
y. On the other hand, the discriminator D receives as inputs
the label y, a real point-cloud point xt (which belongs to the
tongue represented by the label y) and the generator output
x̃t and tries to discriminate the fake (i.e., generated) from
the real point. In the mathematical parlance, this can be
described as:
LD = Ext [log D (xt , y)] − Ex̃t [log D (x̃t , y)] ,
LG = Ex̃t [log D (x̃t , y)]

(3)

where D tries to maximize LD , whereas G tries to minimize LG . The training process is considered complete when
D is no longer able to differentiate between the real and fake
point-cloud points.
Please note that instead of generating whole point-clouds
for every provided pair (z, y) of noise and label, respectively, we merely generate a point corresponding to the surface which the label y represents. That confers several advantages in comparison to the rest of the methods in the literature, such as: a) we do not need to have in our training set
point-clouds with the same number of points and as a result
we can train our GAN without any data pre-processing on
the raw point-clouds, which do not have a fixed number of

of the generated points are discarded as fake by the discriminator with high confidence).
To remedy this, we slightly softened the discriminator,
especially in the initial steps, by slightly modifying the real
points fed to it. To achieve this, instead of directly feeding a
real point xt corresponding to a label y to the discriminator,
we feed the following:
a)

b)

c)

Figure 5. A visual description of the mechanism explained in Section 3.3.1. In a) we depict a raw tongue mesh with blue colour and
with green colour we draw a section. In b) we show the 3D points
(green color) that belong to the tongue surface and lie upon the
section and with lighter green we depict the accepted areas from
which points can be sampled and then fed to the discriminator as
real data. These lighter green areas become gradually smaller as
the training evolves till they collapse to the ground-truth 3D points.
In c) we provide a zoomed-in area.

points among them, b) when it comes to generating pointclouds corresponding to a particular label, we can generate
on demand as many points as we want and, contrary to the
rest of the literature, we are not constrained by any initially
fixed resolution.
Since their inception, a plethora of GAN architectures
and losses have been introduced in the literature [1, 19, 8,
9, 32]. For the TongueGAN loss we chose the Wasserstein
loss with Gradient Penalty (WGAN with GP) [19] due to its
stability and good performance throughout the training process. As far as the architecture is concerned, we turned our
attention to the recently proposed Π-Nets [11, 10], which
are easy to implement and achieve state-of-the-art results
in a large battery of tasks, including graph representation
learning. In particular, we use our own, custom modification of Π-Nets to accommodate the needs of our task. A
graphical presentation of the network structure is provided
in Fig. 4.
3.3.1

GAN loss for accurate surface approximation

Even though, as can be clearly seen in the experiments, our
custom Π-Nets modification along with the WGAN-GP loss
significantly improve upon the vanilla GAN or point-cloud
GAN [26], there is still room for improvement as the pointcloud representations are not ideally reconstructed (see Table 1).
We primarily attribute this to the strict behavior of the
discriminator in GANs (i.e., deciding in our case whether a
generated point matches exactly a point of the target pointcloud). This rigidity, especially in the early steps of the
training process, is not very helpful, as the generator struggles to learn the real distribution of the point-clouds (i.e., all

xt0 |y ∼ N xt|y , σe I



(4)


where N xt|y , σe is a multi-variate normal distribution
with mean xt and (isotropic) variance σe . The variance σe
is not dependent on the label y. It is only dependent on the
epoch e. By employing (4), especially when the training
process commences, the generator can better learn the actual distribution as it does not get severely punished by the
discriminator when it slightly misses out the actual surface
(see the accompanying Fig. 5 for a visual understanding).
As can be also seen in the experiments, this addition yields
better results and stabilizes the training even further. We begin the training with a relatively small value for the variance
and further linearly reduce it as we go along with the training process till it basically becomes zero towards the final
epochs. This is further corroborated empirically in Section
4.
3.3.2

Re-training the pipeline

After the training is complete, we use the trained generator
together with the trained encoder from Section 3.2. In this
way, we create “in-the-wild” pairs of 2D/3D data as follows:
we feed the 2D “in-the-wild” image to the encoder and get
the label ỹ. We then use this label ỹ and the generator to
produce a 3D point-cloud of the input image. As we can
see in Fig. 8, although TongueGAN is trained only on our
collected data, it is able to generalize very well in “in-thewild” images and as a result we can use it to create 2D/3D
tongue pairs. We apply this process to a number of “inthe-wild” images to create multiple pairs. Finally, we retrain the pipeline we presented in Section 3.2, using also
the aforementioned pairs.

4. Experiments
This Section is organized as follows. We begin by providing details regarding the training of the networks. Moreover, in Section 4.1, we outline a series of quantitative as
well as qualitative experiments under control conditions and
finally, in Section 4.2 we describe our results under “in-thewild” images.
The MLP utilized for the regression between the labels
ỹ and the PCA parameters pt in Section 3.2 has a structure of (256, 128, 110) with a ReLU activation in the in-

termediate layers. The hyper parameters of (2) which balance the losses are λ1 = 1.2, λ2 = 1.6e − 4, λ3 = 0.4,
λ4 = 0.2, λ5 = 0.8 and λ6 = 1.5. As described in
Section 3.3, for TongueGAN we used a variant of WGAN
with GP [19], which includes the injection mechanism [11],
as well as the surface loss function presented in Section
3.3.1. More specifically, we utilized a 9-layer Generator
(G) and a 8-layer Discriminator (D) with a total number of
parameters of about 8 × 106 and 4 × 106 , respectively. We
trained TongueGAN using the Adam optimizer [24] with
(β1 = 0, β2 = 0.9). We also trained with a batch size of
2048 for a total of 106 iterations. Following the idea introduced in [21], we use individual learning rates for D and G
with values of 1e − 4 and 1e − 5, respectively. Finally, we
start training with the variance σe in (4) being 5e − 3 and
we linearly decrease it by 10% every 50 × 103 steps. The
exact network structures are deferred to the supplementary
material with more details.

Figure 6. Various raw 3D tongue scans of our database depicting
different tongue expressions along with the corresponding 2D renders.

4.1. 3D tongue reconstruction in control conditions
In this set of experiments, we used 90% of TongueDB
for training and the rest for testing. Due to the intricacy of
the tongue as a surface (as we explained in detail in Section 3.3), we decided to use a GAN for the tongue surface generation part. Moreover, an extra reason to utilize
a GAN for the training is the fact that it is able to generalize very well in unseen labels during testing. To the best of
our knowledge, the only method which has been introduced
in the literature and is able to carry out point-cloud generations based on unseen labels is PointCloud GAN (PC-GAN)
[26]. Consequently, in what follows we draw comparisons
against PC-GAN [26] and another two variants of TongueGAN, namely: a) TongueGAN v1, which is the same as
TongueGAN with the only difference being that the novel
loss function (Section 3.3.1) is not available in this version,
and b) TongueGAN v2, which is the typical GAN structure
where, instead of the injections we have simple concatenations along the layers. Finally, we also report the results
for the regressed tongue expression (referred to as TongueReg). For this, we only take into account a small patch
around the oral cavity defined by the ground truth point
cloud, in order to deduce a reasonable error.
Quantitative results are provided in Table 1 and qualitative results are presented in Fig.7. For the quantitative results, we utilize the test set of our TongueDB and we measure the error based on the two commonly used type of distances when it comes to unordered 3D data, namely Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) [16].
As can be clearly seen in all of the comparisons, TongueGAN outperforms the compared methods by a large margin
whereas the regressed tongue expression outperforms the
rest of the methods.

a)

b)

c)

d)

Figure 7. Qualitative comparisons on various pointclouds from the
test set of TongueDB. a) input image, b) ground-truth point-cloud,
c) the point-cloud generated by TongueGAN and finally d) the
point-cloud generated by point-cloud GAN [26].

Table 1. Quantitative comparisons among the compared methods
using CD and EMD as metrics. Lower values indicate better performance. TongueGAN achieves the best results in all settings.

Method
TongueGAN
Tongue-Reg
PC-GAN
TongueGAN v1
TongueGAN v2

EMD
1.62e-2
1.79e-2
1.82e-2
1.97e-2
2.24e-2

CD
5.25e-5
1.10e-4
1.13e-4
1.67e-4
2.09e-4

4.2. 3D tongue reconstruction “in-the-wild”
In this Section, we attempt to reconstruct the 3D surface
of the tongue together with the entire head structure from
“in-the-wild” images. In this set of experiments, we used
all of TongueDB for training. We also added to our training
data another 5K “in-the-wild” tongue images and created
their 3D point-clouds using TongueGAN. Using all these

Figure 8. 3D head reconstructions with tongue animations from “in-the-wild” images. From left to right, we depict the “in-the-wild” image,
then the point-cloud generations from two viewpoints and finally the 3D head reconstruction with a zoomed-in area around the oral cavity.

data, we re-trained the pipeline according to Section 3.3.2.
The results are only visual as we do not have ground-truth
point-cloud data to report quantitative comparisons. Regarding the comparisons, we should note that PointCloud
GAN [26] cannot be used in these experiments, as in order
to work in the conditional setting, it needs as input the actual
ground-truth point-cloud it attempts to reconstruct, something which we do not have at our disposal. Given that the
TongueGAN variations (i.e., TongueGAN v1 and TongueGAN v2) perform worse than PointCloud GAN [26], we
only present results in this Section regarding TongueGAN.
Since our tongue regression method is based on the mean
template mesh of UHM we can easily utilize the pipeline
presented in [37] in order to extent our approach to a particular facial identity. We begin by fitting a facial mesh to the
image domain in order to get the 2D/3D landmarks and the
identity of the subject and then we regress to the full head
topology based on the UHM model. After reconstructing
the head shape we crop the image around the projected 2D
mouth landmarks. We then feed this cropped image to the
re-trained pipeline and get the mean head shape with the
tongue expression as mentioned in Section 3. Finally we
merge the predicted tongue shape with the associated identity by treating the predicted tongue expression as a separate
blend-shape.
Some 3D reconstructions can be seen in Fig. 8. As evidenced, our pipeline is able to accurately reconstruct the
3D tongue details even in “in-the-wild” conditions. Additional tongue reconstructions of our method before and after
the re-training framework against state-of-the-art methods
can be seen in Fig. 9. To further empirically validate that
TongueGAN is able to capture the 3D structures of random
tongues that are not included in the training set we provide
linear interpolations between unseen latent features in the
supplementary material.

Input Image

GANFit

UHM

Ours

Ours
after re-training

Figure 9. Qualitative shape evaluation between our approach and
the state-of-the-art methods of facial [17] (GANFit) and head [37]
(UHM) reconstructions. We can easily deduce that the re-training
framework plays an important role in the final tongue reconstruction from “in-the-wild” images.

5. Conclusion
In this work, we presented the first pipeline which is able
to perform 3D head and tongue reconstruction from a single
image. To achieve this, we collected the first diverse tongue
dataset with various tongue shapes and positions which we
make publicly available to the research community. To also
make this pipeline robust in “in-the-wild” images and to
mitigate the absence of their corresponding ground-truth
3D tongue data, we introduced the first GAN method that
is tailored for accurately reconstructing the 3D surface of
a tongue from 2D images. As we show in a series of experiments, we are now able to accurately carry out 3D head
reconstruction together with the tongue from a single image
and thus create more realistic 3D avatars.

Input Image

References
[1] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou.
Wasserstein gan. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07875, 2017.
6
[2] Pascal Bérard, Derek Bradley, Markus Gross, and Thabo
Beeler. Lightweight eye capture using a parametric model.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(4):1–12, 2016. 2
[3] Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. A morphable model for the
synthesis of 3d faces. In Proc 26th annual conf on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, pages 187–194, 1999.
2
[4] James Booth, Epameinondas Antonakos, Stylianos
Ploumpis, George Trigeorgis, Yannis Panagakis, and
Stefanos Zafeiriou. 3d face morphable models” in-thewild”. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 5464–5473. IEEE,
2017. 2
[5] James Booth, Anastasios Roussos, Evangelos Ververas,
Epameinondas Antonakos, Stylianos Ploumpis, Yannis
Panagakis, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 3d reconstruction of “inthe-wild” faces in images and videos. IEEE transactions
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(11):2638–
2652, 2018. 2
[6] James Booth, Anastasios Roussos, Stefanos Zafeiriou, Allan
Ponniah, and David Dunaway. A 3d morphable model learnt
from 10,000 faces. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5543–
5552, 2016. 2
[7] Giorgos Bouritsas, Sergiy Bokhnyak, Stylianos Ploumpis,
Michael Bronstein, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Neural 3d morphable models: Spiral convolutional networks for 3d shape
representation learning and generation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages
7213–7222, 2019. 5
[8] Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya
Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 2172–2180, 2016. 6
[9] Shiyang Cheng, Michael Bronstein, Yuxiang Zhou, Irene
Kotsia, Maja Pantic, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Meshgan:
Non-linear 3d morphable models of faces. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.10384, 2019. 6
[10] Grigorios Chrysos, Stylianos Moschoglou, Giorgos Bouritsas, Jiankang Deng, Yannis Panagakis, and Stefanos
Zafeiriou. Deep polynomial neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.13026, 2020. 6
[11] Grigorios G Chrysos, Stylianos Moschoglou, Giorgos
Bouritsas, Yannis Panagakis, Jiankang Deng, and Stefanos
Zafeiriou. P-nets: Deep polynomial neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 7325–7335, 2020. 6, 7
[12] Hang Dai, Nick Pears, and William Smith. A dataaugmented 3d morphable model of the ear. In Automatic
Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018), 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on, pages 404–408. IEEE, 2018. 2

[13] Hang Dai, Nick Pears, William Smith, and Christian Duncan. A 3d morphable model of craniofacial shape and texture variation. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 3104–3112, 2017. 2, 3
[14] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li,
and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 248–255. Ieee, 2009. 4
[15] Bernhard Egger, William AP Smith, Ayush Tewari, Stefanie
Wuhrer, Michael Zollhoefer, Thabo Beeler, Florian Bernard,
Timo Bolkart, Adam Kortylewski, Sami Romdhani, et al.
3d morphable face models—past, present, and future. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(5):1–38, 2020. 1
[16] Haoqiang Fan, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. A point set
generation network for 3d object reconstruction from a single
image. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 605–613, 2017. 4, 7
[17] Baris Gecer, Stylianos Ploumpis, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos
Zafeiriou. Ganfit: Generative adversarial network fitting for
high fidelity 3d face reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1155–1164, 2019. 1, 2, 8
[18] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages 2672–2680,
2014. 5
[19] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent
Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville. Improved training of
wasserstein gans. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 5767–5777, 2017. 6, 7
[20] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 770–778, 2016. 4
[21] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a
two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 6626–6637, 2017. 7
[22] Aaron S Jackson, Adrian Bulat, Vasileios Argyriou, and
Georgios Tzimiropoulos. Large pose 3d face reconstruction
from a single image via direct volumetric cnn regression. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1031–1039, 2017. 5
[23] Aaron S Jackson, Chris Manafas, and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. 3d human body reconstruction from a single image via
volumetric regression. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 0–0, 2018. 5
[24] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014. 7
[25] Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Baris Gecer,
Stylianos Ploumpis, Vasileios Triantafyllou, Abhijeet
Ghosh, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Avatarme: Realistically
renderable 3d facial reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 760–769, 2020. 1, 2

[26] Chun-Liang Li, Manzil Zaheer, Yang Zhang, Barnabas Poczos, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Point cloud gan. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.05795, 2018. 6, 7, 8
[27] Jiaxin Li, Ben M Chen, and Gim Hee Lee. So-net: Selforganizing network for point cloud analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 9397–9406, 2018. 3
[28] Ruilong Li, Karl Bladin, Yajie Zhao, Chinmay Chinara,
Owen Ingraham, Pengda Xiang, Xinglei Ren, Pratusha
Prasad, Bipin Kishore, Jun Xing, et al. Learning formation of physically-based face attributes. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 3410–3419, 2020. 2
[29] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael J Black, Hao Li, and Javier
Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and expression
from 4d scans. ACM Trans. Graph., 36(6):194–1, 2017. 2, 3
[30] Celong Liu and Xin Li. Superimposition-guided facial reconstruction from skull. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00107,
2018. 2
[31] Dennis Madsen, Marcel Lüthi, Andreas Schneider, and
Thomas Vetter. Probabilistic joint face-skull modelling for
facial reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5295–
5303, 2018. 2
[32] Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond YK Lau, Zhen
Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley. Least squares generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages 2794–2802,
2017. 6
[33] Mateusz Michalkiewicz, Jhony K Pontes, Dominic Jack,
Mahsa Baktashmotlagh, and Anders Eriksson. Deep level
sets: Implicit surface representations for 3d shape inference.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06802, 2019. 5
[34] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative
adversarial nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784, 2014. 5
[35] Stylianos Moschoglou, Stylianos Ploumpis, and Mihalis
Nicolaou. 3dfacegan: Adversarial nets for 3d face representation, generation, and translation. 5
[36] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard
Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05103, 2019. 5
[37] Stylianos Ploumpis, Evangelos Ververas, Eimear O’Sullivan,
Stylianos Moschoglou, Haoyang Wang, Nick Pears, William
Smith, Baris Gecer, and Stefanos P Zafeiriou. Towards a
complete 3d morphable model of the human head. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
2020. 2, 3, 8
[38] Stylianos Ploumpis, Haoyang Wang, Nick Pears,
William AP Smith, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Combining 3d morphable models: A large scale face-and-head
model. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 10934–10943, 2019.
2
[39] Rolandos Alexandros Potamias, Jiali Zheng, Stylianos
Ploumpis, Giorgos Bouritsas, Evangelos Ververas, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Learning to generate customized dynamic

3d facial expressions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09805,
2020. 5
[40] Anurag Ranjan, Timo Bolkart, Soubhik Sanyal, and
Michael J Black. Generating 3d faces using convolutional
mesh autoencoders. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 704–720, 2018. 2,
3
[41] Nataniel Ruiz, Barry-John Theobald, Anurag Ranjan,
Ahmed Hussein Abdelaziz, and Nicholas Apostoloff. Morphgan: One-shot face synthesis gan for detecting recognition
bias. arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2012, 2020. 1
[42] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Morishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li. Pifu: Pixel-aligned
implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05172, 2019. 5
[43] Ayush Tewari, Michael Zollhöfer, Pablo Garrido, Florian
Bernard, Hyeongwoo Kim, Patrick Pérez, and Christian
Theobalt. Self-supervised multi-level face model learning
for monocular reconstruction at over 250 hz. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 2549–2559, 2018. 1, 2
[44] Zdravko Velinov, Marios Papas, Derek Bradley, Paulo Gotardo, Parsa Mirdehghan, Steve Marschner, Jan Novák, and
Thabo Beeler. Appearance capture and modeling of human
teeth. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(6):1–13,
2018. 2
[45] Nanyang Wang, Yinda Zhang, Zhuwen Li, Yanwei Fu, Wei
Liu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Pixel2mesh: Generating 3d mesh
models from single rgb images. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 52–67,
2018. 4
[46] Erroll Wood, Tadas Baltrušaitis, Louis-Philippe Morency,
Peter Robinson, and Andreas Bulling. A 3d morphable eye
region model for gaze estimation. In European Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 297–313, 2016. 2
[47] Chenglei Wu, Derek Bradley, Pablo Garrido, Michael
Zollhöfer, Christian Theobalt, Markus H Gross, and Thabo
Beeler. Model-based teeth reconstruction. ACM Trans.
Graph., 35(6):220–1, 2016. 2
[48] Shangzhe Wu, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi.
Unsupervised learning of probably symmetric deformable
3d objects from images in the wild. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 1–10, 2020. 1, 2
[49] Zerong Zheng, Tao Yu, Yixuan Wei, Qionghai Dai, and
Yebin Liu. Deephuman: 3d human reconstruction from a
single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 7739–7749, 2019. 5
[50] Yuxiang Zhou and Stefanos Zaferiou. Deformable models of
ears in-the-wild for alignment and recognition. In 2017 12th
IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2017), pages 626–633. IEEE, 2017. 2
[51] Reza Zolfaghari, Nicolas Epain, Craig T. Jin, Joan Glaunes,
and Anthony Tew. Generating a morphable model of ears.
pages 1771–1775. IEEE, Mar 2016. 2

